Hello, hello, Jarek, Amogh. Welcome to Talk Python To Me. Awesome to have Amogh, you here,
and Jarek, you back. Yep. Welcome. Very nice to be again at Talk Python To Me. That's one of my
favorite podcasts I listen to all the time. Thank you. Thank you. It's my first, but yeah,
thanks for having me here, Michael. Yeah. Happy to have you here. You all have built,
You and a team of people, given the scale of this project, have built an amazing product with Apache Airflow.
It's going to be really fun to dive into it.
And specifically, we're going to focus on not building workflows exactly, although I'm sure we'll talk about that somewhat.
The real goal, the thing that we're going to focus on is how do you manage such a big project
with so many different little inner internal packages
that all depend upon each other and so on.
And monorepos and that.
I've touched on monorepos before, but two things.
I think this makes a really interesting discussion
for listeners out there.
One, this is going to be very concrete with exact steps.
And it's even open source.
You can go check it out and play with it.
And two, the tooling and the standards
have changed significantly.
since I talked about this three or four years ago,
making much of what we're going to talk about possible, right?
Yes, absolutely.
Yeah.
Now, before we dive into that, of course,
let's do quick introductions.
Jarek, it's been a while since you've been on the show.
Who are you?
Tell people who you are.
I'm an Apache Airflow maintainer,
one of the PMC members as well,
and also one of the Apache Software Foundation members.
I've got this nice pin, new logo of Apache Software Foundation
that we got at FOSDEM. I'm also an Apache Airflow security committee member, which is an important
aspect for what we are discussing today because of supply chain and dependencies and
lots of security potential potential security issues these dependencies bring. Yeah, I'm one of
the few lucky people to get to contribute to open source full time and get paid for it, which is like
amazing. Maybe another podcast one day about that because I think that's also an interesting one.
Yeah, I have something like that, a topic somewhat like that brewing. So yeah, potentially,
I'll have to have you back for that. Amok?
Yep. So, hey, I'm Amok Desai. Again, similar to Jarek, I'm a PMC member and
computer at Apache airflow. And I'm also a part of, I'm one of the top 10 contributors to the project,
top 10 all time contributors to the project, Jarek being number one.
So I work at Astronomer as a senior software engineer, where I get to live in both worlds.
One is contributing to airflow score development, and also supporting the companies that are trying
to run air flow at scale right awesome what is astronomer tell people about that yeah it's a
it's a company where most of our uh we're a company which is almost one of the leading
contributors to apache airflow and also the leading consumer of it we supply uh and we provide a
managed distribution of uh corporate managed distribution of apache airflow inside astro
and yeah i think we have a data platform as well to try and make your life easier to use airflow at
scale yeah incredible let me add to it two comments so as airflow has a number of stakeholders and the
commercial stakeholders who are hosting airflow as a service as well and you know like using airflow
and we have contributed contributions from all over the place astronomer by far like the biggest
number of contributions and fantastic open source stakeholder. We were very much focused on making
Apache Airflow truly vendor-neutral Apache project. I'm always amazed how well this works.
And the second thing, the number one, I'm cheating a bit. I do a lot of small PRs. This is how you get
the number one. I guess it depends how you measure it. You could always just do one ginormous AI
PR that's like 100,000 lines of code in your PR and people would love you for it.
You'd be a mega contributor.
Oh, yeah.
Well, no.
No.
He does both.
Well, no.
The funny part is Jarek does both.
It's his velocity amazes me or, I don't know, shocks me sometimes.
He does massive PRs and also like a lot of tiny ones.
And by the time I'm looking, there are like three more out of it.
I don't know how he does it.
Yeah, we're going to get to a bit of how much traffic there is on Airflow in terms of like open source activity.
It's some, it's a little bit.
Before we move on though, Jarek, what is the Apache Software Foundation?
What is this Apache thing that you're just talking about and why is Airflow part of it?
Okay, so very quickly, it's a foundation, one of the oldest foundations, open source foundation in the world.
25, 26, seven years now, I think.
The main thing about Apache Software Foundation
is that it's individual driven.
So every member is an individual, not a corporate,
as opposed to like Linux Software Foundation
where members are corporates.
And people make decisions in both foundation and projects
or in PMCs so-called or project management committees.
And Airflow is one of the PMCs.
So one of the project management committees
which has PMC members.
We are both PMC members and we have like 50 other individuals
or 60, I can't remember, like the number changes,
like we are inviting new ones all the time.
And we make decisions as humans, as individuals,
not the corporates who are employing us, for example,
because it's a meritocracy based system
where people have merit and the merit doesn't expire
and the merit doesn't belong to individuals,
not to the corporates.
And yeah, so that's one of the big,
like pretty much all the open source software out there
like has some Apache foundation or Apache component in it.
It started with Apache server 28, 30 years ago almost,
but now we have more than 300, 200 PMCs.
We just passed 10,000 committers mark two months ago, I think.
So like lots of individuals, lots of people contributing to the foundation.
And the main thing about foundation is community over code.
So we value building communities more than actually producing code.
We believe producing code is just byproduct of great communities working together.
And ASF is a charity, is a public good charity in US registered in Delaware.
So we actually cannot be sold.
We cannot change our license.
Nothing like that can happen because of the status of the foundation.
How interesting. And a really positive force for open source, right?
Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. And it's when I met when I first got into like learning how ISF works, I said like, that it has no chance to work like there is no way it works.
It's too idealistic. There's no way.
It's too. Yeah, absolutely. And nobody in the foundation who makes decision gets any money.
Like everyone is a volunteer, all the PMC members,
all the commuters, all the board members,
all president, all the VVPs,
those are all volunteer driven roles.
And those are the people who make decisions.
We just pay a few people in infrastructure and security.
That's basically it.
- Right.
Awesome.
Well, very cool.
So let's dive into it.
What is, let's start by just talking about
high level abstract.
What is a monorepo?
I think it's so easy to make that sound
like the same thing as a monolith.
You're like, oh yeah, monorepo, monolith, same thing, right?
And yet you're shaking your head.
- No, not even close.
Yeah, the first time I met personally monorepo,
maybe I can continue with that,
but that was like at Google,
where I worked at Google years ago,
and I was surprised coming to Google
that all the code there is in a single monorepo,
even though we have hundreds of products
and all the stuff you see.
- It's gotta be a lot of code, right?
Like a giant, giant repo.
- It's like now they have like maybe four.
I don't know, I've heard some stories.
I don't work there for a long time now.
But for me, that was a sign that
you don't really have to split and dice and slice
your repositories into many, many small ones,
even if you have like non-monolithical product,
that it all can be kept in a single repository,
separate source trees maybe, separate like,
we'll talk about how we do it in Airflow,
but it's a way how you can bind it together
and have it tested together and have it developed together,
even though each piece is pretty much separate
and you can work on them separately.
So that's the monorepo, as opposed to multirepo,
which is like when you have multiple repositories
consisting of whatever is comes up as a product.
Yep. I agree with everything that Jarek said, plus just a small addition,
which is each of the component or the tiny bit of a monorepo
can have its own build artifacts, its dependencies.
And also it can also have its own release cycle or a release vehicle.
That's the only addition,
but everything is put together as a big puzzle just to keep the right it could have it if it's
in python terms you know not every mono repo is python but in python terms it could have its own
pyproject.toml potentially its own virtual environment yes right yes exactly yeah yeah
i think one of the nomenclature ironies of this is often the mono repo i think makes more sense
when you are working with lots of small parts right where the monolith maybe it has a couple
of things but it doesn't depend real deeply the more interconnections you have and the harder
it is to manage those versions the more something like this makes sense right absolutely so so the
main thing is like people really make a connection between isolated work on part of the system
into having to have separate repository for that which is completely not the case like you can
actually have an isolated sub part of the repository even if it's git git doesn't have
like gift have some modules and sub repos and all the stuff but even like in a single git
repository you can easily have like start working and focusing on a small part of of the whole
monorepo and only care about that and that's what the monorepo is
yeah you know i'm not a i'm gonna go ahead and put it out there i'm not a big fan of
of microservice architectures, I kind of find it's trading code complexity for DevOps and
deployment complexity. And I think we have better tools to manage code complexity than DevOps
complexity. But something like this does help you manage those kinds of deployments as well,
better, right?
Yes, yes. I use the term mini services, not microservices. Microservices is just
much. But then you can have a lot of a number of mini services, but not micro.
It's like micro was just too much of a mixed feed.
Yeah, I can get on board with that. Amak, what do you think?
Yeah, I like that idea as well. Mini services. Maybe you should coin that.
Yeah, it's like it's the microservices are too small. It feels to me like the
equivalent of when you're trying to write unit tests and you're like, oh, what if I
get a customer and I set their first name and then I check that their first name is
set, like, what are you doing? You don't need to check that assignment works. This is too,
you're just too much in the weeds. You know what I mean?
This is what AI agents do now all the time.
Yeah, think of the code coverage. Just think of the code coverage. Come on.
You've got some goals to hit. You said 80% code coverage. It's on top of it.
All right. So that's, that sets the stage. Let's talk a little bit about
specifically how Apache Airflow
has come to need this basically.
You shared with me the GitHub pulse for Apache Airflow.
And I think it's kind of worth looking at just how much
open source interest and traffic there is.
Who wants to kind of summarize this weekly pulse here?
I'm okay.
No, Mark, do it.
So, yep. This is not the best week in terms of the number of commits. We have had even more read,
but this is just one of those weeks. Yeah, one of the usual weeks. So between Feb 3 and Feb 10,
we've had about 310 active pull requests so you can imagine that's uh about 40 plus pull requests
a day a lot of a lot of them are being assisted by the uh you know the ai revolution going on but
yeah again that's a lot of pull requests and we have merged about 200 of them and
about 100 are open and similarly with issues right uh 35 new issues uh five issues per day
so that's a lot of traffic so you can imagine the amount of review pressure each of
uh each of the maintenance has here there's 300 pull requests spread across i don't know one
120 130 maybe 140 distributions and each of each of the distributions having like a swim lane owner
who is actively trying to take a look at these pull requests.
So it's just another week, to be very honest.
And it's more than 25 PRs a day, including weekends.
Incredible.
And how many of these PRs are high value?
I guess I'm trying to get the sense of,
how much does this get accepted?
Are these just people throwing stuff out there
that doesn't make sense for the direction of airflow?
So well, those merged all make sense because they are reviewed and merged by Airflow maintainers.
And we are very serious about that.
So like we don't merge anything that doesn't pass our bar, which is like very high,
like extremely high.
Like we have 170 prac hooks which are checking if the code is doing what it was supposed to be doing
and if it's architected properly.
on top of that we have uh individuals people like among myself and then maybe 50 other uh pmc
members and committees uh who are reviewing it and making their comments and know the system uh
enough to direct people so they may make sense we do have recently and that was a recurring them at
the fosden uh conference last week when i was there about like the ai uh generated contributions
and many of the ai generated contributions are not the best quality it's not like ai is bad
quality is that like many of those are easier to produce and they might have bad quality so we are
now learning how to filter them out and how to make the to handle them quickly but but those are the
the actual high value prs that we merged nice in in terms of numbers if you if i may the it would be
maybe a third of the open pull requests that are nice, general trend.
Yeah, that's pretty good, honestly.
Yep. That's pretty good.
We have some guidelines published very recently and due to that we have seen a dip in
such quality of PRs. We published some guidelines in our contribution guides about what will be the
action taken if uh you know bad quality prs are raised or uh non or ps erased where the author
does not know the context but the ai does yeah sure yeah yeah i don't want to go down this rat
hole people hear this enough lately but i just it's been in the news lately that um open source
projects have been kind of getting a barrage of ai submissions and i think that comes in a couple of
flavors one people who just want to get their name listed as a contributor maybe it helps them with
their job or whatever so there's like a small incentive there but it's been really bad for bug
bounties like curl closed its bug bounty program because people were trying to make the 50 or 250
dollars by finding some issue with ai is that a problem for you all just taking the pulse of a big
project like that it it it is i actually had a talk about that at the global vulnerability
intelligence platform summit just before fosden so that was exactly like i i even quoted daniel
stanberg and i met him there at fosden like they were really cool uh that uh but there are some
different motivations of people who are submitting those those ai issues and we should fight with the
in different ways with different uh approaches or like you know respond to those motivations
somehow we have some ideas we have an open discussion uh in github maintainers uh list
right now and github is trying to up to uh to address it by like just discussing what they can
do right now and that's the highest priority for them also we have a discussion with ossf
for security uh kind of guidelines or policies for open source maintainers how to deal with those
issues and i'm sure we will work out some ways and toolings and most of all uh processes
and like being assertive is one thing like just saying no when the report doesn't meet all the bars
immediately and you know directing people to the description is good enough of a of a you know
barrier for uh you know getting kind of completely broken prs because we have to just make it more
expensive for the reporters than for the maintainers to diagnose the issues or yeah decide if the
issues are bad or good yeah and i'm not necessarily saying that there's something inherently bad
because ai wrote some of the code than a person ai can write really good code better than a lot of
people i've seen but it it has this sort of shotgun effect often of just like i'm going to change all
these files and it's not as focused and clear a lot of times it just it doesn't it doesn't get the
the Zen of it, you know?
Amogh, what do you think?
- Yeah, I agree with that.
It'll generate code, which it thinks is good,
but we don't really know the ripple effects.
And we want to avoid such things.
- Yeah, yeah, you've such a long living app
with lots of complexity, right?
- We all are using AI for generating the code,
to be honest.
So like, most of my--
- And you should, you should, yeah.
- Yeah.
it's incredible.
I pulled up this graphic here, and I'll link to it in the show notes.
Just giving people a sense, I got this little utility that I released this week
called Tallyman, which analyzes code and gives you more of a breakdown
than just this many lines or whatever.
So I want to just highlight, maybe you all can riff on this a little bit
to give a sense.
So 1.2 million lines of Python, 918,000 excluding comments.
Maybe a little overcounting the way this thing works, but still 200,000 restructured texts.
The one that really stood out to me, 81,000 lines of YAML and 16,000 lines of TAML, you guys.
That's impressive.
And you know what?
Hat tip to just a sprinkle, just a hint of Java at 42 lines of Java.
But you know, a hundred, almost a million,
just over a million lines of code without comments.
That's a big project.
What do you think?
- Amok, what happened when you joined?
- I don't know.
I think it was much lesser, but yeah.
- Yes, you did contribute a lot.
- It's a lot of code.
And you can imagine so because of the number of packages
we have in the monorepo discussion
We have a lot of packages and the YAML might surprise you at first, but
if you actually go and see why the YAML, it's mostly for our providers.
So integrations with other systems is something we call as providers.
And the spec of the providers is written in YAML.
And Toml, I'm sure we'll come to it very, very soon.
Yeah, yes, that's kind of why I pulled this up actually, is the Toml aspect is
of us with that number as we move on.
16,000 lines of TAML.
That's a lot of pyproject.taml going on right there, folks.
Oh, yes.
And lots of it is generated, actually.
So because we actually generate quite a lot of the YAML
and TAML that we have, and we keep it in the repo,
because we don't want to regenerate every time.
So it's a lot-- we don't write YAML by hand, no.
Yeah, of course.
Very cool.
- Okay, so now, you know, let's,
maybe we can start by introducing this
by just giving a shout out to this series
that you wrote over here on Medium, Erik.
- Yeah.
- Modern Python repo for Apache Airflow,
parts one through four.
- Yes.
Yes, I initially started discussing this blog post idea
with a few people.
And people are busy and I couldn't get people to write it.
So I decided to write it myself.
Well, with a lot of AI help, of course.
It's not that everything is written by hand.
And when I wrote it, I realized it's too big.
And I had to split it into four.
But the idea was to document what we've done.
Because I think that a lot of people
are struggling with monorepo versus multirepo
or like how they should do their repository
in when they are a project growth.
And there were lots of discussions in the past,
including one of the podcasts of yours
were Monorepo versus MultiRepo.
And I can't remember who that was,
but there was discussion about like going back and forth
and like finding that people sometimes go back
and then go forth and like in different directions
because there are different problems with both approaches.
So I just wanted to document the reasoning why we are doing it,
like why it's possible now because of the packaging ecosystem
maturing for Python and uv and other tools coming into the space.
And then the last part was like really the kind of a little bit innovative
approach that we do where the tooling is still not catching up with what we need
and what we did.
So yeah, so those are the kind of history
why we are doing it, the packaging,
the automated verification with Prack,
that was the third part.
And the fourth part was about like this shared
libraries, innovative concept that we added for Earthful.
- Nice.
Yeah, I'll link to the series as well as to a talk
that you gave at Vostum that just got published, right?
Yes, a few days ago, yes.
Yeah, that's a good talk.
They have an amazing system of recording and publishing stuff.
Like for the volunteer-driven conference, 1,000 speakers.
Oh, that's amazing.
That works like brilliant.
Probably some automation going on there.
Oh, a lot.
Yeah, so let's talk a little bit about, I guess, the problems that you ran into
because initially there were some challenges with the standards and tooling
not be there and you actually one of the takeaways if people read the series or
watch the talk is you actually had to work with some of the tool providers to
make this possible so not only is it like well the tools have changed what we
could do this it's you all have changed the tools a little bit through you know
working closely like hey we've got this 1 million line project with 100 sub modules or more help
like it's your tools to support this help me make this work right what were some of the problems
okay so let me start with this cooperation and maybe you know amok can also explain like what
was before and after because like he experienced that firsthand as a as a user kind of this kind of
repository structure but for me the idea was like i i was working on it for years like uh when
we went to airflow two five years ago uh we or four years ago i can't remember that's a long time
we didn't have all the tooling and we had to do pretty much everything that we do now with the
with monorepo and uv uh by hand uh by bash scripts by that time by crazy so like if you run it three
years ago your code you would see more than 10 000 lines of bash code which i wrote oh wow we since
that is not joyful that doesn't spark joy no no no that's why we removed it with some outreach
internship actually and shout out to edit and borna who were our outreach mentors who helped us to
convert it to python which was really helpful uh so that that's how it started no tooling uh a need
need because we grew we wanted to have more providers more integrations and it already was
quite difficult to manage if they all were part of single distribution so we have to split into
many distributions 60 i think at the beginning now we have more than 100 now now uh and uh when we
did that i we had to do all manually and like working with that was like really cumbersome
and maybe you know like i can i can switch to to amok so he can say like the past experience a new
experience because like he experienced the change himself yeah the past experience was
scary to be to speak the least uh whenever i uh switch branches or have to rebase for whatever
reason it i had a nightmare a very bad time trying to you know package things together and try to
to run something.
And I think Jarek found me often,
ranting on the Slack channels that,
hey, this doesn't work, hey, that doesn't work,
what do we do?
Now it's very easy.
It's effortless, almost effortless compared to
what we had years, maybe like five years ago,
four years ago.
- Yeah, amazing.
How does GitHub deal?
- Just to add to that,
- Go ahead.
- Before we go on.
So like the part of it was also that the,
been listening so like i was the only one who actually managed the whole thing for years and
i was like overwhelmed as well when people have problems of course so then the change that we've
done was not only with the tooling and as you mentioned we were actually cooperating with charlie
from astral charlie marsh and with joe from feck uh because we had this need we had it implemented
ourselves and then they could look at how we've done that and they could implement it properly in
their tooling and we've been like exchanging the you know like charlie was even interviewing me at
some point of time how we how what what are our needs uh so so i have for a long time i have this
this motto that uh the best way to foresee future is to shape it and like so we did shape the future
by you know talking to those tool providers so that they can or builders so that they could build
it for us and work with us and we help them to test and everything like that but also it was like
listening to amok and other contributors like all the problems they had or like and then when i
solved it i would i wouldn't also only solve it with the new tooling but we also engaged all the
more people from the from the team like amog and few other active contributors and they were
actually part of the whole process of conversion and they are now part of the team and now we can
have this podcast while things are being broken in airflow right now and somebody is probably
we're fixing it as we speak.
So not me anymore.
So those old things are really great.
- That's really, really good.
Yeah, incredible.
How does GitHub deal with so many files
and such a big project?
Is it fine or is it a challenge?
- Except yesterday where half of the time-
- Yeah, yeah, except yesterday.
Yeah, for people who don't know,
yesterday morning, at least morning US time,
GitHub was having a moment.
Like it was, I couldn't clone stuff.
I pulled up the random page on GitHub and got the 503 Unicorn.
It was not good, right?
Besides that, excluding that time.
So the Unicorn is actually a little bit like looking kind of angry at you.
That's one of the observations I had from yesterday.
I saw it so many times that it doesn't look nice.
I agree.
That's not a great error page.
Like some error pages are amazing where it's like,
you know, the coyote fell off of a cliff.
Woo!
That one just looks like it's angry back at you.
- Exactly, exactly.
So no, besides that, it's perfect.
It's like, it works like seamlessly,
no problems whatsoever with the size, with the numbers.
Like we are very, very happy in general.
And of course, like things like that happen.
There is nothing wrong.
Like there is something wrong,
but like it's not like that it happens all the time.
Not really.
- No, it's actually, it's super rare.
GitHub is an incredible service.
I mean, I know there's been some grief about the GitHub actions, but that's a different conversation, right?
Yeah.
All right.
Let's talk next about how the package standards have changed and how basically some of those things have made it possible.
So in your talk, you pulled up a bunch of different peps,
nine of them or something like that,
that were about packaging,
recently packaging standards and different things like that,
that have made basically the structure that you're working with
and the tools that do it possible.
Do you want to maybe highlight either of you,
some of these things that stand out as like,
actually this one is really important.
Well, for me, the one which is maybe not super related to Monorepo,
but it actually helped us a lot, like the PEP 7.2.3,
the last one but last inline script metadata,
which is like one of the biggest successes
and the biggest kind of usages I see from a PEP implemented.
It caught up very, very quickly.
It allows to embed inline script metadata into the Python scripts,
which is like something that we've been dreaming of for years,
especially for this kind of tooling, the FCI environment, etc.
This is really, really helpful.
So that's the one that I would like to highlight.
But I read all of them many times, all the tabs,
and they are difficult things to read and understand.
But they were like, we actually did all that we could
to be fully compliant,
not only with the specification of those tabs,
but also with the kind of spirit of the specification,
sometimes things are not very precisely described and there are some interpretations and stuff
so we just we just made sure and this is our our goal as well like we just make sure that all the
PEP standards that are being published are actually very very meticulously followed and we just try
to adapt to any changes that are coming in the environment so we know how difficult it is if
people are sticking to the old ways and like that's that makes difficult for python maintainers
- Mag, any other thoughts?
- Yeah, this one is a particularly very important one for us also because it simplifies our
pre-commit configurations where earlier we had to specify the dependencies as requires
or whatever the particular version was, but now it's all in the script.
the pre-commit remains as clean as it could just with the hook name and you know the rejects for
the file filter and minimal configurations for it to work well and dependency group is also the other
PEP i don't recall the name but i recall the number i think it's six oh i can't remember all the
numbers but one of that would be 735 folks 735 yeah so that's also particularly nice for us we can
define the dependency groups in our by projects and it's it's nice to uh how it's how it's really
nice how it works with uv so we are very happy with this particular uh dependency group  PEP as
well as the uh inline scripts i think right the inline scripts are cool i you know especially
with uv these days it really makes running some kind of python code so much easier it's it's almost
as if everything is standard library you know i can give somebody a file i can say the way you run
it no no no don't i know it looks like you say python but don't say that you say uv run this
and then and that's it like they didn't have to have python they might need 10 dependencies and
so on it but it doesn't matter right yeah yeah and being standard it makes it also you know like
other tools are doing the same or hatch run that's the same that's like yeah and then there are there
There is even support for inline script metadata
just released in latest pip 26.
So it's all good because of the standards
and not because a single particular tool
does it in an opinionated way.
So this is really, really, really cool.
And there is one big benefit of those kinds of apps,
and particularly inline script metadata,
is we have less YAML because of that.
- Yeah.
- You already have a lot of YAML.
- Less is better.
We have a lot still, we can't complain about that.
- It's better than it was.
Yeah, and so the dependency groups are like,
you know, for dev or for test or something like that, right?
So you can say like uv sync or uv pip install
and you can say like thing bracket dev
or something like that, right?
- Or actually the nice thing about uv sync
is that it syncs the dev dependencies automatically
without you even specifying that,
which is like the best thing for development
because you actually always want to have
development tools with you.
- That's a good point, yeah.
Totally agree.
Okay, fantastic.
- That's really cool, that's really cool.
- So that was the changes to Python itself
through the PEPS, but there's also tools
and you've already mentioned some of them, both of them,
but tools that make this possible,
which I mean, I think uv has to be number one
that goes on this list, right?
Like uv has really done some powerful stuff here, right?
- Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, so maybe again, Amok can say like,
I introduced it, but Amok was the one to switch
to use uv at some point of time.
- Yup, uv has been a game changer.
I think we were using poetry before this or?
- No, no, no, not even that, just pip.
Just pip, just pip.
- Just pip, right?
It's so good. I don't even remember the last thing.
Yeah. So, yep.
I think the main, you know,
game changing aspect that uv brought in was this notion of workspaces.
It's something very, you can compare it very similar to, you know,
a coworking space or something similar where it's a unified environment where
multiple interconnected pieces coexist and they're very easy to manage.
And that's something that eventually led us
to splitting the whole repository across our distributions.
And that's the reason you see so many TOML files.
So everything has a PI project TOML,
everything defines the dependency groups it needs
and development of a particular package
is restricted only to its dependencies.
So you develop it, you run uv sync,
You can run your pytest using uv,
and everything that is supposed to run with it
is running with it, and any bad or cross imports
are caught really easily.
So I think the workspace feature, at least,
was the most important one for me,
and obviously the speed that it brings with it.
So that's very impressive as well.
It is.
And I think this workspace concept--
It's new to me.
I'll say it's new to me.
I don't know how new it is to other folks.
So you've got this giant monorepo.
And how many different, conceptually,
different packages or projects are in there right now?
120 plus.
It changes by day because Amok is doing a lot
to increase the number very, very quickly
because we are just now in the middle of finishing
some isolation kind of restructuring.
And Amog is the one that,
that's why he's here also to lead the introduction
of new packages that we,
or new distributions that we have,
like a shared libraries that we will talk about later.
So we have a lot of those, yes.
Yeah, amazing.
So I think this is super important to dive into
and how uv makes this possible.
And I think you said also Hatch,
you talked with Ofec,
who runs Hatch as well about this, right?
Yes, yes.
Hatch is also supporting WorkSpaces,
which are modeled mainly about what like after the what uv has done has done we haven't tried it yet
but i've heard it's very very similar or even like you can use it as a one-to-one replacement
in some cases or maybe even in all uh but generally i would love this eventually to become some kind
of standard so that multiple tools are supporting this but but yes the there are a few other tools
that we were considering before but uv is by far the kind of like yeah well we worked together we
shaped it together with the U18. So it definitely works well.
Amazing. Yeah, amazing. So let me describe this a little bit. And then you all can, can actually
introduce it. So the idea is we've got this mono repo with a bunch of different folders for the
sections, right, like airflow dash CLI or CTL, and airflow dash core and so on. And you'd like to be
able to kind of just jump into one section and treat it as a top level project, right? It's got
a pyproject.toml, it's got a source file, tests, and so on. But the challenge is you can't just
have a bunch of disconnected pieces, like maybe Airflow core depends on five other parts of it
that are also themselves have their own pyproject.toml and different things. And you've got to set up,
you know, set up. If you jump into the Airflow core, you got to set up the environment just
right to be working on those other parts right it sounds um it sounds pretty tricky so how does
how does that work who wants to make sense of this for us yeah okay so like it works perfectly
like it's super it's super simple actually you know like the whole thing about the uv is
like its simplicity of the of of the of the of the not of the concept the implementation is actually
quite tricky but the way how you use it is very simple you just go to the directory and run
uv sync that's basically it so like this is uh this is to the directory you want to work on and
it it does exactly what you would expect it to do which means that it syncs it actually updates the or
recreates basically the virtual environment that you're using with all the dependencies that this
particular uh distribution needs and anything that it needs uh as a transitive dependency as well
so if it refers to another project project inside the workspace it will also use it from there
not from like installed by pi pi so we can immediately start working on this because
everything after uv sync everything is exactly as you expect for this particular
subset of the repository that you work on and that's basically it this is this is all
like there is nothing more basically it's like that's it it works and and you can when
you're done you run uv sync py test run it will do exactly what you want so in this folder because
because it will just, oh, sorry, uv run pytest.
- uv run pytest.
- You can do exactly what you want,
because even uv run will automatically sync
the virtual env very, very quickly
to the one that your project needs,
and then it will just run pytest
in this virtual environment,
and it will run all the tests in your project,
and that's basically it.
So it's like, conceptually for the users,
it's like, you don't have to do much,
just uv sync, and that's it.
yeah how how interesting i i think one of the big challenges here is you know how does how do
different parts of the project know about each other right yeah yeah you said that it uh it sim
links the different elements in well okay so like the basic the basic the basic kind of workspace
and implementation is just a workspace definition so you have to have the finishing of workspace
in the top level byproduct tom so there you have all of them listed you have links to it you have
describe where they are and uv will read the PI project on from the top level and will
know where to look for particular distributions.
So that's the simple discovery and the way how we know that we are using it from the sources
and not from the PI PI.
But then like the shared libraries is like something that we added on top of it and the
sim links are on the top of it and this is kind of extra innovative thing that we are doing for
something else that we need but you know we can we can talk about that now or like i'm not can
talk about that sure okay yeah yeah good yeah we can talk about it when we're talking about it
okay sounds good so
this is really cool one of the things that happens here is these different these different slices or
subsections of the monorepo have a pyproject.toml that pyproject.toml
defines its true dependencies and its dev dependencies and so on so when you go and jump
into a section it will uv will basically realign the virtual environment with whatever
dependencies are supposed to be there from those things right so that means installing stuff
obviously but actually what surprised me a little bit not a lot but oh yeah i guess it does do that
that's cool is it actually uninstalled stuff that's not explicitly put there which i can imagine
before that you could be like well this one part way down here depends on this weird library
and somehow i used to be over there then i went back to the this other piece then i came back and
and I forgot where that even came from.
Like, why is that in my virtual environment?
And like, how do I specify that?
Probably juggling that was a big problem, right?
This like loading and unloading dependencies
based on what part of the monorepo you're in.
And I think that actually makes it really much easier
to deal with like this type of code structure.
Yeah, absolutely.
And let me add to that one more thing
because it's also not only the dependencies
that you might have from somewhere else,
but also it's cross dependencies between different distributions inside so for example if our flow
ctl does not use airflow core if you go there and run you think you will not be able to import and
use any of the source code which is in airflow core because it's not a dependency of our flow ctl
so uv sync will not only uninstall the dependencies that you have but also i mean install the
the source code that you have from other parts of europeo which is a fantastic thing for us and
And that was exactly what was missing before,
kind of isolation between those.
You only actually can, from your source,
you only can refer to the source code
of those distribution that you depend on
and nothing else from the monorepo.
So this means that it's like,
you can slice and dice your repository as you want.
So depending on in which directory you are
and when you run uv sync, you will have like subset,
like the actual useful and the used subset
from your repository.
And it can be completely different if you go to another directory.
Some of that can be overlapping.
Some of that can be completely different.
Depends like which dependencies are defined.
And this is like, this all magically happens
like by just defining the dependency in PyProject.com, nothing else.
I mean, this thing will handle it for you in the workspace.
This is like exactly the reason why it's so useful for development.
- One thing, one more thing to add to that is, yeah, exactly.
as I said, it helped us in our vision to actually, you know,
decompose the project into multiple parts and avoid the classic
problem of coupling,
which every Mono repo faces at some point in their life cycle,
because everything is out there. Why don't we just, you know,
have code leaks all over the place. So this helps us prevent that.
And I cannot imagine a time how we did it earlier before uv.
I don't know if we did it, but if we did it,
it would have been a really tough thing to do.
Yeah.
There's a bunch of tools that you can,
like linters and code analysis,
things you can run on your code that breaks down.
For these different modules and these layers,
here's like a directed graph of how this thing,
and you can set up rules to say,
this should never cross that boundary,
but these are just very vague things.
And this setup actually makes it so it's not accessible to your code if you didn't say it
should be.
Yes.
So it's just built in exactly the definition of your distribution, which you anyhow have
to do because you have to define what the dependencies are.
And yes, we did something like that before.
So we got a number of rough rules or whatever.
Don't import here.
We still have them for shared libraries, which we can talk about now, because I think this
is an important modification of the of the concept so we do do have some automated check for uh
quality and for imports uh with prague our precomit hook implementation but but before that it was
just completely completely uh like handwritten and unmaintainable people will not we're not actually
updating it with all the distributions you couldn't really you know follow uh when things change with
with my project tom being the for each distribution being the single source of truth you don't have to
do anything because the dependency is declared there and this is like the best part of of
uv understanding that and and doing everything that is like reasonable in this case yeah
yeah yeah so the other major tool involved here was prick which it's a pre-commit framework for
running hooks many languages but especially python relevant here written in rust so it pairs well
with uv i suppose oh yeah it was inspired by uv as well and joe was mentioning mentions that
he was actually contributing to uv yeah cool all right so where's preck how's preck show up here
uh among i feel like this is leading towards what you were hinting at earlier
yeah i'm okay yeah yep so i think it started with uh it was called pre-flight earlier i believe
that's the name preferably git that was the original name oh yeah it was like terrible
it's a new name uh preq so yep this allows us to do things which uh
pre-commit did not do or you know did not accept as suggestions so one certain thing that preck
offers is obviously it's written in rust so speed is the obvious uh advantage that we get but apart
from that we also get this notion of it pairing well with uv in terms of modularized hooks
earlier we had all the hooks in one place in that in the top level pre-commit yaml right and
it was it was a big fight it was you can imagine so yeah so this break allowed us to
break again you know it it consumed the concept of workspaces here i would say so it allowed you to
define pre-commit hooks or preq hooks within a module itself and this paired well with uv in
in the sense that when you have to run hooks
that are bound to a certain distribution,
all you have to do is check in into the, you know,
the sub module and just do a preck run.
It will run the relevant hooks for that particular module.
And the other thing that I really love about preck
is auto-completion, which is not something pre-commit had.
So you can imagine that something fails in the CI,
have to copy that and copy the ID and try to kind of backtrack it in your repo as to which one is
failing. So it used to be a nightmare, but now with the dApp completion, it's amazing.
Nice. Are you talking about like shell autocomplete integration?
Yes.
Yeah. Yeah. So, okay. Nice. I've seen...
So I have some story about that very short one. So like,
we actually tried to get autocompletion for hook names with pre-commit, which was the predecessor.
of Prac, like Prac was largely based on Pracomit, but somehow the author of it didn't accept
even idea of us contributing it or actually had some very, very excessive expectations for that.
And we, you know, discussed and like, there were like other people were also trying to
convince the author to do that, but they refused, he refused basically, and refused to accept
contributions even uh so when when we spoke to joe that was like completely different stories like
we need that and next day it was there like it's like completely different approach so so this
is uh and then we said like we need workspaces and like a few weeks later because it took a little
bit of time it was there and we worked together and we tested that and like i raised i don't know
how many issues in the initial kind of pre-release version when when we wanted to use it so so the
i think the collaboration and being you know working together listening to your users and be
responding to them and and actually working as an open source maintainers together this this
actually worked perfectly well here both both in uv and and in practice and this is why we love
prague actually because because we know we can rely if something is not working that it's gonna be
like we can discuss and either submit a fix or or you know joe will do this or even like lots of
other people can do it because i think the there was uh there was a few features that we wanted
and somebody else implemented it and that wasn't joe they contributed to crack because of this
openness and you know being able to accept the needs of the users so that was yeah that was very
very important part like why we moved to crack yeah i think airflow was also one of the initial
case studies for break it's a project of that scale and if you kind of satisfy that project's
needs you are you're pretty good with most use cases i think that's exactly both like and uv as
yeah right there at the top of the prec repo it says although prec is pretty new it's already
powering real projects you know little things like c python apache airflow and fast api so yeah you
know i i know who gov and kamerate from uh release manager of python uh so we met at for them as
well. And like he was actually listening to our preg discussion and he converted, you know,
cpython to use preg because of the of the needs they had. So like, it was all about, you know,
people talking to each other, word of mouth and things like that.
Yeah. You know, there's a feature listed here that just makes me jealous. One of the features
of preg is a single binary with no dependencies that doesn't require Python or any other runtime
to be installed. Like, how incredible would it be with Python if we had a, you know, a Python, dash,
dash, build app or something, you know what I mean, you can put it at your thing and you get something
you could distribute. I know uv solves a lot, but you still got to have uv installed. And then you
know, like this, that is a huge advantage of things like Rust and go and some other languages.
It's both good and bad in some cases.
So it's like there are always trade-offs.
It's different choice made by Python here.
I don't think it's like the best choice for Python.
I think Python being script language,
it's okay to have, you know, like dependencies
and especially like inline script metadata
almost did it because you just, you know,
can install stuff and uv also,
and the kind of tooling is also doing all the stuff
like uv install or uv tool install,
whatever, and it would not only install the project,
its dependencies, but also install Python
that is needed to run it.
So like all this is really a matter of two weeks
and it has improved dramatically over the last few years.
- It definitely has.
Yeah, I was pining for an option,
not a only binary thing.
All right, so one thing I actually wanna talk about,
going back to this workspaces thing real quick is,
what does it look like from a ide or editor experience to work on this all right like
you've got pyjarm projects you've got maybe vs code workspaces where you can pull in different
pieces how do you all manage that i'm working yeah so i cannot talk for vs code i'm a pyjarm user
here, but we had to do a little bit of hacking, I would say, or more like a helper script for the
IDs, right? Because so we have a ID helper script right in the repo and we recommend the users to
run it so that the ID knows what is where in terms of maintaining things, right? Because in normal
projects, there's usually just one source, one test at the top level, but as 120 plus and
the helper script is, it does a pretty simple thing. It just auto discovers all the packages
in the monorepo and adds, there's a, so IntelliJ and PyCharm both have a dot idea within each,
a hidden folder within each of the projects that it opens and it has a,
and it supports XML like format for IML where you can define certain things. So this essentially
does a very simple thing. It just for each package, it adds the module slash source as the source
root and the module slash tests are the test. So it's as if you went through all 120 things
and right clicked and said mark as sources root or something like that. Yeah. You wouldn't want
to do that. We did that actually. We did that for some time.
- Initially.
Yeah, we had this PyCharm script and then we have the same approach for VS Code. So we have another
script for VS Code as well, which was contributed by someone who uses VS Code because either me or
Amog are VS Code users. But communities also, and somebody said, "Okay, I'll do it." And there it was.
and they tested it and you know like that's that was super cool actually so so yeah it works well
also the you know a little bit of words uh i would probably we don't talk we won't talk too much
about like the we don't have too much time but the shared libraries concept a little bit might maybe
it's the right time to introduce the yeah yeah because we like one thing that amov mentioned
is like the uh we had we solved this coupling problem but also we wanted to solve the dry
problem. And those two are always kind of mixture, like you get dry and then you get more dry and
less coupling and like, like more dry and more coupling and like, all these things are complex
when you have lots of code. Dry being the architectural philosophy of do not repeat
yourself. But if you're not repeating yourself, every, everything where if it exists somewhere,
everything's got to depend on that somewhere. And it starts to become more linked together, right?
precisely so so it's a little bit of like uh uh you know it can have it too like the the
we want to have dry code and not to repeat it for like common utilities like logging
configuration whatever all the things that that are kind of common between all the different
distributions but also we didn't want to depend on a single version of those because if we do
then it means that we have to make sure that the backwards compatibility is maintained because like
when we install different version of different distributions coming from different time
of repository they might use different version of those search libraries and like how to make sure
that they don't do not have breaking changes and stuff like so this is all the whole level
of complexity between like how to manage the dependencies there and manage versions especially
manage the backwards compatibility so we figure out that with some very simple approach we tried
few different approaches but like one of the approaches was using the vendor ink library from
pip and from byton uh not from people from pip and the second one and that's the one we came up we
we finally implemented with like using sim links to share the code between different distributions
and that's a very innovative approach that i hope uh will make it into some kind of standard
eventually so like we came with this approach where we actually have cake and eat it too like
which is like pretty amazing if you fought with like for years with this kind of
common dependency issues that and and and backwards compatibility so in our case like the symlink
approach we have and it needs some preq kind of pre-processing of by project tom so some parts of
the by project tom are generated to make it actually work but this is all automated with
preq which is like you don't have to think about that even and once we do that and once we create
some similar sim links between different parts of code like one library one distribution is
sim linking code from the shared distribution the end result is that this code gets automatically
vendored in during the building of the package which means that we actually have the same library
in different package in different version in different distributions so distribution released
week ago will have a shared configuration from a week ago but this another distribution will have
the same shared configuration code from today if it's released today and we can install them
together and all of them have effectively uh like if they had a different version of the
same library installed i see it's as if the airflow dash ctl said it had a dependency on
core and it pinned that version to something but a different part of the repo pinned it to a
different version right they can both kind of coexist that's but it's actually all within the
same code file. That's insane. Okay. And this is like largely like, it's nothing new. It's largely
inspired by how the, you know, libraries work in C and like traditional kind of building code. Like
you have dynamic libraries and static libraries. So this is like essentially equivalent of static
static libraries where you take the code of the version that you compile the stuff in and put it
inside the final binary and then it results like in rust the kind of single binary thing so
it's a little bit like so this we have a little bit of this single binary by doing that in like
in the sense that we automatically vendor in all the you know shared dependencies that we have
in the same distribution so so it's it's kind of hybrid but it's always like it's also like so rust
is a little bit too far because everything is single binary in our case we have a bit of both
like we can use libraries dynamically but we can also embed libraries as shared inside the
single distribution. That's very cool. Amogh? Sounds like you were instrumental in this part.
Yeah, so that's the nice thing about the approach that was chosen, right? We all came together as a
we had one email uh devilish discussion one fine day that hey we want to achieve something like this
which more or less was a uh was something everyone agreed upon so people started chiming in and we
started trying different things out the first one obviously using the rendering tool from
uh somebody did a poc on that but it felt like it's going to be difficult to achieve that over
long term and and also it would it could be brittle so Jarek came up with this particular
option with sim links which again was discussed within the community few of us a few of us picked
it the picked this pr up passed it locally played around and gave the feedback so i don't think
this would be possible with ai in in the sense that this has never been done before yeah so some
something like this where a community comes together and solves a rather difficult problem
is something that makes me really happy and also something that all of us are working towards a
common goal while while also bound by our corporate hats right is something that is again really nice
to see we have about how 11 i think at this point we have about 11 to 12 shared libraries where
the main notion here is to reimagine airflow as a independent server and more like a control plane
and execution plane what we did with airflow three and this shared libraries is helping us achieve
that model. And we have about 11 to 12 of them. And I think a few more coming very soon. But yeah,
it's been nice working on the shared libraries. It's been great.
That's cool. Is this something that people can take and adopt into their monorepo if they want
to live that life? Absolutely. It's really like one or two kind of
of preq hooks, which are maintaining the consistency.
And like, so that you don't forget to add this sim link here
and that kind of PyProjectTOM definition here
and the, or that hatch definition for the hatch link
to actually embed your sim linked code
into the final distribution.
So like there are like a few pieces
that have to be put together from existing libraries.
So that's basically it.
And once you do it, it's just, those are,
the funny thing is like those shared libraries
just standalone distributions you can actually build them separately as a library as well we could
we could potentially even you know like just use them as library as well no problem whatsoever
because they are just standard plain distributions or any other we just happen to take the source code
of it and then embed it in into into the target distribution that wants to use it rather than you
know link to it by dependency so that's basically other than that it's it's it's a kind of
completely standard library and uh or standard distribution and one one more thing that is really
important to add here is like this also has a side effect but i think a very nice one and ammo can
confirm that because he has been doing a lot of that is like we actually come up with like way
better internal architecture because of that because a lot of those that the shared libraries
they depended on each other sometimes in a circular fashion sometimes it really depended
and like which import you did first, like what happened,
like what was initialized?
And it was like complete spaghetti of dependencies
between generally independent pieces of functionality.
Right now by having shared libraries,
we are actually forcing ourselves to make them isolated
and we are changing the way how we initialize them.
For example, we are injecting all the configuration
rather than using them from inside the library
because like configuration library is another library,
so you don't want to depend on the other library.
So it's really nice.
I think it comes, the result is that really the architecture of Airflow internally is
so much better because of that.
So less surprises and explicit initialization is like something that we'll have to do rather
than implicit initialization during imports, which has always been plaguing as a big issue.
Certainly. It also allows you to imagine each component having an entry point, per se, where you have an initial starting point and it initializes everything it needs by injecting and calling certain factories, which makes a very clean for anyone visiting the project also.
they look at something and they know the entry point very clearly.
But here, this is how it starts, this is what it initializes.
Reminds me of Golang or Java projects where they have a nice main where in Python,
Python it's not really the same way, but yeah.
Yeah, very cool.
All right, well, I think that's about it for all the time we have.
I guess let's close it out with one final thought here.
It's just people who are maybe inspired by your design,
by the way you put together Airflow
and this monorepo concept, especially Python people,
what do you say to them?
Final thoughts here.
- Final thoughts, just do it.
I mean, like I initially, there was always discussion.
Like we had lots of discussions internally,
even some of the PM's members in Airflow,
they let's split the repository into smaller one like let's make more of them because it's going
to make things easier i was always the monorepo fan and and i made a lot of work to make it possible
but that was a very very difficult thing it's changed so like the reasons why you would
like to have multiple repos are gone now if you're using the right tooling and only the benefits or
mostly the benefits from having it in one place where you can test everything together and work
on it together remain all the rest is basically gone so for me uh like uh the discussion
on the repo versus multi-repo is already solved nice yeah just do it uh we it's it's not even uh
so personally i've been using uh using the readme that we have present in the
shared libraries as a context for my uh id so it's it's turning out to be very nice uh for the
shared library split for example all all i have to do is just provide it the context and tell
it hey just just construct the structure for me and i can do everything else so it's that easy
we have all the things in place we are in the right era to do it so just just do it okay
very inspiring thank you for being here awesome for this look inside and it's apache airflow it's
on github people can go look and see it's not just a talking vaguely about some internal project right
so people can go check it out yeah all right see you later thanks thank you thanks bye